[Music]
mosquitoes those brazen little buggers
that buzz off with a belly full of your
blood bah humbug
they can even ruin a nice picnic in the
park camping out with your friends or
even your own humble abode boy
mosquitoes are the single worst thing
about summer why do they have to bite
and why does it itch like crazy it's
time we got some answers nature is a
strange thing indeed Australia's got
platypuses mammals that lay eggs and
have beaks like ducks
there are jelly fishes that can
potentially live forever there are so
many exotic and extremely rare creatures
that can be called true oddities or even
miracles of nature but mosquitoes come
on they're nothing like that they're
innumerable and they come in swarms just
about anywhere you go still and I really
don't want to accept it myself they
appear to be a miracle of nature as well
first of all mosquitoes are ancient
critters thought to have evolved between
50 and 100 million years ago that means
even the dinosaurs weren't free of their
irritating presence imagine a t-rex
trying to swat one away with his tail
poor thing and of course they spread
everywhere
chances are the first human being on
this planet was bitten by a mosquito
probably more than once in their life
mosquitoes proved to be a highly
adaptable species except for Antarctica
they live on all continents in a variety
of climates from tropical sub Saharan
Africa to the cold forests of Siberia
Russia there are about 3,000 different
species of mosquitoes all around the
world all they need for survival is some
water and a warm meal no not your
granny's home cooking they only want
once pumping through your veins
[Music]
so how did they become adapted to feed
on the blood of animals just to get
things straight well right from the
start not all mosquitoes suck blood I'm
not talking about different species of
this insect but about severe differences
between female and male mosquitoes only
females drink blood while male specimens
feed solely on nectar it's as if all the
men on earth were exclusively vegetarian
by Nature
such a critical difference in feeding
behavior between males and females is
extremely rare the good news is you can
tell the difference between the two male
mosquitoes are a bit smaller than
females and if you see one nearby with
fancy looking feathered antennae don't
rush to smack it just yet it's a male
and it won't bite you no matter what you
see the wings of female mosquitoes move
so swiftly that they resonate on a very
high frequency from 300 to 500 beats per
second this makes that annoying
high-pitched buzzing sound that can have
you scouring your house slipper in hand
the male's feather head pieces are
specifically a tone to locate this sound
so they can find a mate as for the
antennae of the female mosquitoes
they're smooth a mosquitoes lifespan is
only about a month or two well that's
for the females the guys live a lot
shorter around two weeks all this time
they must keep busy especially females
and since their job is a lot harder they
need to find a source of blood meal to
be able to produce eggs but I'll go into
that more a bit later once their eggs
are ready it's time to find a nice place
with standing water to release them
since they're in a race against time
they look for a source of blood usually
within one to two miles of the breeding
ground and that's exactly why you
shouldn't have any standing water near
your house if you don't want a mosquito
invasion okay but what about that bug
zapper you have on your front porch
sorry
not much use here contrary to popular
belief mosquitoes don't search for their
prey looking for lights to be fair there
many species that prefer human blood at
all most of them would rather feed off
mammals that you know don't grab a shoe
or newspaper and squish them but there
are even more like that that feed only
on birds or even reptiles and amphibians
well if they don't use light then how do
they find you they have a variety of
methods but they mostly use scent more
specifically they're sniffing for your
body heat and the one thing every living
breathing thing produces constantly
carbon dioxide or co2 every time you
exhale you allure loads of flying pests
a mosquito can sense a tiny
concentration of pure co2 in the air
from more than 75 feet away egg just
hold your breath well no at closer
distances they'll go towards the heat
and anything that moves they have a
couple things to help them with that
latter bit one compound eyes with
hundreds of lenses that give them a wide
field of vision and two tiny hairs all
over their body that guide them toward
the movement of big animals so when
you're out
the lawn your body is moving the air
around you and the tiny hairs on a
mosquitos body can sense this still the
true mystery of mosquitos is in their
feeding habits what you perceive only as
a short stinging feeling is in fact a
long and ingenious process when a
mosquito finds its prey it approaches
carefully the buzzing kind of gives them
away but I guess they can't do much
about that since the sound comes from
their flapping wings the task is even
more difficult since they need three
minutes to fill their belly that's three
minutes of the constant threat of being
smashed by their prey how has anyone
ever told you that waving your hands are
swatting at mosquitoes to scare them
away is pointless
next time you can answer back with this
a 2018 study led by biologists dr. Jeff
riffle proved that mosquitoes can
remember the scent of a particularly
aggressive prey and avoid it completely
for 24 hours that means if a mosquito
tries to bite you and you decide to
brush it off or swat at it it'll
probably choose someone else to bite
nets and that's wise of it because even
if it manages to land undetected it
won't be able to sting immediately a
mosquitoes mouth beats or a proboscis is
far more complex than just a sharp straw
to suck blood through it consists of six
separated long and thin parts called
style it's protected by an outer lip of
sorts
yes they stick not one but six needles
in you some of those have razor-sharp
teeth that cut through the skin here's a
fun fact medical scientists were
inspired by the form of a mosquito
stylet to make needles less painful well
that's good other parts of a mosquitos
feeding equipment serve different
purposes some find blood vessels in the
skin and others inject the mosquito
saliva the saliva itself is crucial in
the whole process remember they need
around three minutes to get enough blood
but the most dangerous part is the
moment they pierce the skin because
that's when the prey can feel the bite
so the mosquito injects its saliva
immediately after it bites you the
saliva consists of more than 100
different components most of which are
these organic substances called enzymes
they serve one purpose to stop blood
from clotting and improve its flow there
are also other components used like a
local anesthesia from the moment they're
in the prey won't feel anything
that is until the mosquito leaves and
the bite mark starts itching the reason
for that reaction is simple most people
are allergic to those enzymes and I say
most because there are those rare
individuals who won't each at all if a
mosquito bites them must be nice but the
last and most important question remains
why do they need blood especially if the
male's can just live off nectar like I
touched on earlier females need blood to
develop eggs more specifically she needs
loads of protein and iron which blood
happens to be rich in after a good meal
and a belly bloated full of the red
stuff a mosquito will need a day or two
off just to digest it then she lays her
eggs and the whole cycle starts again
good thing we don't take first place on
her menu of preferred meals and we
humans are well prepared for their
invasion no matter how many of them come
my only advice is to use methods that
mask your scent like candles herbs and
sprays the best traps are probably the
ones that properly use science to lure
mosquitoes to their demise in masses by
producing the carbon dioxide they seek
still any repellant will do the trick
so that you're not left it in like the
dickens alright how about you what do
you do to keep mosquitoes at bay leave
your tips down in the comments if you
learned something new today then give
this video a like and share it with a
friend but hey now don't go bugging out
just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out just click on that video to
the left or right and enjoy stay on the
bright side of life bright